
# MultiMarkdown and LaTeX #

[LaTeX](http://www.latex-project.org/) is a professional quality typesetting
system that can be used to take plain text markup and produce a high quality
pdf, complete with table of contents, index, glosssary, etc. It's a fairly
complicated program, but capable of doing most of the work for you. One of my
goals with MultiMarkdown was to make it even easier to create a LaTeX
document, with minimal knowledge of the LaTeX syntax. In fact, you can create
fairly complex documents without any understanding of how LaTeX works, as long
as you have it installed correctly.


That said, MultiMarkdown is not simply a preprocessor for LaTeX files, so
there will always be LaTeX commands that are just not available from within
MultiMarkdown. If you're a LaTeX expert, you might find that after
MultiMarkdown runs, you want to go and hand tweak a few parts to get things
just right. But for the average user and average document, I suspect the
default output will be just fine.

The settings to pay particular attention to:

* You must choose an XSLT file to convert the MultiMarkdown-generated XHTML
  into LaTeX; you do this by setting the `LaTeX XSLT` metadata. If you do not
  choose one, the default is `memoir.xslt`. Most of my XSLT files are based
  around the `memoir` package --- it's the one I'm familiar with, it's very
  flexible, and has high quality output, and lots of features. That said, you
  are welcome to create your own XSLT files to use whatever packages you
  prefer. The beauty of the XSLT transformation process is that it can be
  completely reconfigured however you like.

* Depending on what sort of document you are creating, you may need to set the
  `Base Header Level` metadata. For example, if you are creating a `memoir`
  based document, and wish for your top-level section to be a chapter, rather
  than a "part", you could set `Base Header Level` to 2. It's easier to do
  than explain, but basically it moves all levels of your structure by the
  specified number of steps.

* You likely will want to set as much of the basic metadata as possible (e.g.
  `Title`, `Author`, `Date`, `Keywords`, etc) as most of this is converted to
  a format that is used in the resulting PDF.

Also, MultiMarkdown has support for
[BibTeX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BibTeX), glossaries, html links,
internal links between sections of the document, math formatting, etc. Most of
the "major" features of LaTeX are available using the standard MultiMarkdown
syntaxes. If there is something you don't see, just ask --- it may exist, or I
might be able to add it if appropriate.

The general process of creating a PDF via LaTeX is the same as the normal use
of MultiMarkdown, with one additional step:

1. Create your text source file

2. Using your method of choice, convert the text file to XHTML, and then
convert the XHTML to LaTeX (most of my tools will do this as a single step as
far as the user is concerned).

3. Convert the LaTeX source file to PDF using the tool of your choice (my Drag
and Drop [application](http://fletcherpenney.net/MultiMarkdown_Drag_and_Drop),
[TeXShop], [latexmk](http://www.phys.psu.edu/~collins/software/latexmk-jcc/),
manually, etc.)

Due to the complexity of the LaTeX source, it can be hard to troubleshoot when
using an automatic tool. If something doesn't work, I recommend first trying
to get your MultiMarkdown text file converted to XHTML and verify that it is
correct. Then convert the XHTML to LaTeX and be sure that you can watch the
status messages that occur during processing of the LaTeX file - they will
usually give you a hint as to where the problem lies. Remember, just because
the XHTML version of a MultiMarkdown document is valid XHTML does not mean the
resulting LaTeX will be totally valid.

[TeXShop]: http://www.uoregon.edu/~koch/texshop/ "TeXShop Homepage"

